Verifier-Centered Auto-Research Agents for Lie-Group Multibody
                    Integrator Development:
                    A Versioned Case Study
                                           Jingquan Wang
                               Simulation-Based Engineering Laboratory
                                  University of Wisconsin–Madison
                                                  June 9, 2026

                                                     Abstract
          Large-language-model agents can edit code, launch experiments, and summarize logs, but those
      capabilities are not sufficient for numerical-method research. In Lie-group multibody dynamics, a
      candidate integrator can produce an attractive convergence plot while failing to preserve velocity-level
      constraints, relying on an unreported endpoint projection, comparing against an unfair reference policy,
      or exceeding what its proof actually establishes. This paper proposes a verifier-centered architecture for
      building domain-specific auto-research agents for constrained Lie-group integrator development. The
      central design principle is that the agent must co-design four objects: the method specification, the
      verifier sandbox, the proof ledger, and the numerical example ladder. The resulting workflow represents
      each candidate method as an explicit one-step-map object, runs bounded validators before full artifact
      generators, separates theorem inputs from diagnostic evidence, and records claim states as accepted,
      diagnostic, open, or forbidden. We ground the architecture in a versioned research tree that evolved
      from v001 to v048 for lower-pair multibody integrator work. The current case study centers on a
      Gauss6/FullVA path with a conditional sixth-order method claim, smooth observed position/velocity
      orders of approximately 7.161/7.066, four ASME mechanism examples in the evidence system, and explicit
      nonpromotion boundaries for full source-paper temporal finite-element replacement, source-policy external
      superiority, sparse runtime superiority, and sharp-friction coarse-regime behavior. The contribution is
      not a generic “research agent” recipe. It is a concrete methodology for using agents in a research domain
      where proof obligations, numerical examples, and paper claims must remain synchronized over many
      iterations and many contributors.

Keywords: auto-research agents; multibody dynamics; Lie-group integration; constrained differential-
algebraic equations; numerical verification; proof ledgers; reproducibility.


1    Introduction
Multibody simulation is useful only when the time integrator respects the geometric and algebraic structure
of the mechanism being simulated. In rigid and flexible multibody systems, finite rotations must remain on
the relevant Lie group, bilateral joints must satisfy position-, velocity-, and acceleration-level constraints, and
reaction forces or friction laws may change the engineering conclusion drawn from the simulation. These
requirements make integrator research different from ordinary software development. A script can run
successfully, a plot can look plausible, and a regression test can pass, while the method is still not a defensible
integrator.
    This distinction matters for laboratories that develop simulation methods over many projects. In one part
of the lab, researchers may work on Lie-group Runge–Kutta or collocation schemes. In another, they may
work on lower-pair constraints, friction/contact laws, sparse Newton solvers, public benchmark mechanisms,
or reproducible paper packages. These activities interact through a shared evidence space. A change in the
stage residual can invalidate a proof ledger; a change in the reference policy can invalidate a work-precision
comparison; a mechanism that closes position constraints may still be only a coverage row rather than



                                                          1
an accepted asymptotic dynamic-order row. An auto-research agent for this setting is valuable only if it
coordinates these dependencies instead of merely generating code.
    This is also why the problem is practically important inside a lab rather than only philosophically
interesting. Multiple researchers may be attacking the same integrator family from different directions: one
person improving a Gauss-collocation residual, another building an ASME mechanism mapping, another
checking public-code baselines, and another preparing a manuscript. Without a shared verifier and memory
system, those threads can drift into mutually inconsistent claims. The agent proposed here is a coordination
mechanism for that research ecology: it keeps each person’s artifact useful to the others by recording exactly
what the artifact proves, what it only diagnoses, and what it does not yet justify.
    The motivating case in this paper is a versioned research pipeline for Lie-group, lower-pair multibody
integrator development. The pipeline currently contains a Gauss6/FullVA path, a temporal finite-element
(TFE) comparison target, ASME-style mechanism examples, proof and claim ledgers, and a cross-paper
same-test benchmark scaffold. The artifact state is deliberately bounded. The accepted local method
claim is a conditional sixth-order Gauss6/FullVA claim with smooth observed position/velocity orders about
7.161/7.066. Four ASME examples enter the method evidence system; single- and double-pendulum rows
support dynamic-order evidence, while four-link and slider-crank rows support mechanism coverage and
closed-loop consistency unless a stronger residual-to-error theorem or true dynamic-order campaign is closed.
The pipeline does not claim complete source-paper TFE residual reproduction, full source-policy external
superiority, or sparse runtime superiority.
    This paper asks: how should an auto-research agent be built for this kind of integrator research? The
answer proposed here is verifier-centered. The agent does not treat experiments as a flat task list. It maintains
an explicit method object, chooses a sandbox level before execution, keeps proof obligations in a separate
ledger, selects numerical examples to expose specific failure modes, and writes paper claims only through a
claim-state machine. In this architecture, autonomy is not measured by how many commands the agent can
run without a human. It is measured by how reliably the agent prevents unverified claims from crossing the
boundary into the paper.
    The paper makes four contributions:
    1. It formulates a domain-specific architecture for auto-research agents in Lie-group multibody integrator
       development.

    2. It defines the core research objects–MethodSpec, ProblemSpec, EvidenceSpec, and ClaimSpec–that let
       an agent preserve method identity and paper-claim boundaries.
    3. It introduces verifier and proof sandbox patterns that separate read-only validators, bounded audits,
       full artifact generation, and external source-policy campaigns.

    4. It grounds the framework in a v001–v048 versioned case study, showing how each phase of the project
       added a verifier because a previous phase exposed a new failure mode.


2     Background and Motivation
2.1     Constrained multibody integration
Constrained multibody dynamics is commonly formulated as a differential- algebraic system with kinematic
constraints, velocity constraints, acceleration constraints, and Lagrange multipliers. Classical references on
stiff ordinary differential equations and DAEs emphasize that the numerical method must be matched to the
index and stability structure of the problem [3, 4]. For mechanical systems, the problem is compounded by
rotations. Lie-group integration methods address the fact that rigid-body orientations are not Euclidean
vectors [5, 6]. Constrained Lie-group time integration has therefore become a recurring theme in multibody
dynamics [7, 8].
     The practical difficulty is that no single plot captures all relevant properties. Position error, velocity
error, constraint drift, multiplier consistency, Newton convergence, runtime, and reference-policy fairness are
different pieces of evidence. A method that performs well in a smooth single-body test may fail in a lower-pair
mechanism. A method that satisfies endpoint position constraints may still hide a velocity inconsistency.


                                                       2
A method that has an exact sparse pattern may still lose to a dense automatic differentiation backend in
wall-clock time.

2.2     Temporal finite elements and comparison targets
Time finite element methods provide another way to construct high-order time-integration schemes for
structural and multibody dynamics [15, 16, 17, 18, 19]. The motivating source-paper family includes higher-
order integration of index-3 DAEs with friction using time finite elements on Lie groups [1]. In the local
pipeline, the source-paper TFE formulation and the implemented Gauss6/FullVA path are deliberately
distinguished. The accepted local method claim is not that the complete source-paper residual has been
reimplemented. Rather, the local TFE target appears as a formal-order comparison object: a paper-style
m = 3 Gauss–Lobatto TFE target with expected order five, contrasted against the conditional sixth-order
Gauss6/FullVA path.
    This distinction is a representative example of why an agent needs a claim ledger. A generic agent may see
TFE-related diagnostics, convergence plots, and source-policy files and compress them into a single statement
that “the TFE method was reproduced.” That statement would be wrong. The artifact boundary is narrower:
some formula mappings and diagnostics exist, but full_tfe_stage_replacement=false remains an open
stronger reproduction target.

2.3     External baselines and source-policy fairness
External comparison introduces a second class of failure. A local method may look superior if it uses a
different time window, a different reference solution, a different error metric, or a different work metric. The
relevant baseline family in the case study includes SBEL/Negrut mechanisms and rotation-representation
work, including exponential-map, absolute-coordinate, half-implicit, and velocity-partitioning/Lie-group
baselines [21, 22, 23, 24, 25]. The v048 scaffold therefore treats external comparison as a source-policy object.
Until same-test campaigns are run with matched parameters, drivers, reference policies, error metrics, and
work metrics, the claim external_superiority_claim=false remains active.


3     Problem Statement and Design Requirements
The task is to build an agent that helps researchers search the space of integrators, repairs, examples, proofs,
and paper claims without corrupting the evidence boundary. We model the agent as a controller over a
research state
                                             S = (M, P, E, C, L),
where M is the method specification, P is the problem or benchmark specification, E is the evidence set, C is
the claim set, and L is the ledger containing proof, validation, version, and paper-package status. The agent
proposes actions, but every claim-changing action must pass through a verifier.

3.1     Failure modes
The case study suggests seven recurring failure modes:
    1. Method drift. The agent modifies rows, variables, tolerances, or endpoint policies and then compares
       the result as if it were the same integrator.

    2. Projection masking. A post-step projection repairs a constraint residual but changes the one-step
       map.
    3. Proof/numerics confusion. Observed slopes or fixed-tolerance logs are promoted into theorem
       inputs.
    4. Coverage/order confusion. A mechanism coverage row is written as if it were an accepted asymptotic
       dynamic-order row.



                                                       3
    5. Reference-policy drift. External baselines use different time windows, references, or work metrics.
    6. Negative-result erasure. Failed candidates are not recorded, causing repeated exploration of the
       same invalid repair.
    7. Paper-claim overreach. A mechanically buildable paper package is described as submission-ready
       despite open source-policy or quality gates.

3.2     Requirements
A useful agent for this domain must satisfy the following requirements:
R1: Method identity. The one-step map must be explicitly represented, including state space, stage
    variables, residual rows, endpoint policy, and solver policy.
R2: Deterministic problem specifications. Benchmarks must pin masses, inertias, joints, drivers, fric-
    tion parameters, step sizes, reference policies, and metrics.
R3: Sandboxed execution. Read-only validators, targeted audits, full generators, and external campaigns
    must be separated.
R4: Proof separation. Theorem inputs must be kept separate from diagnostic numerical evidence.
R5: Example ladder. Numerical examples must be selected to expose specific failure modes before broader
    claims are made.
R6: Negative evidence. Failed repairs must record residuals, ranks, spans, runtime, and claim effects.
R7: Claim-state control. Claims must be stateful and demotable: accepted, diagnostic, open, opt-in, or
    forbidden.


4     Agent Architecture
4.1     Research objects
The proposed architecture is organized around four objects. Table 1 summarizes their roles.


               Table 1: Core objects maintained by the domain-specific auto-research agent.
 Object                Contents                                 Why it matters
 MethodSpec             State space, stage variables, residual     Prevents the agent from changing the
                        rows, endpoint map, solver policy          method identity while preserving the
                                                                   name.
 ProblemSpec            Mechanism, parameters, drivers, friction   Makes examples reproducible and
                        law, time window, step sizes, reference    comparable.
                        policy
 EvidenceSpec           CSV rows, JSON summaries, plots,           Defines what counts as evidence for a
                        validator outputs, proof certificates      gate.
 ClaimSpec              Claim text, status, required validators,   Prevents diagnostic evidence from
                        nonpromotion rules                         becoming paper claims.

    The agent loop is then:
                      read ledgers → select open gate → propose bounded hypothesis
                       → choose sandbox → run verifier → update evidence/claims.
The human chooses the research direction, but the agent enforces the evidence boundary before any claim
moves. This is the opposite of a code-only agent. The primary output is not a patch; it is a controlled
transition in the research state.


                                                      4
4.2    Skills and memory
The agent is intentionally assembled from narrow skills rather than from a single generic code-editing loop.
In the local artifact system, the explicitly named process guard is the research-pipeline skill: it forces the
agent to read current artifacts before relying on memory and prevents open gates from being marked complete.
Around that guard, the implementation uses several conceptual roles. The numerical-method role knows the
objects that define a Lie-group integrator: charts, retractions, stage variables, residual rows, endpoint maps,
tolerances, and constraint levels. The example role maps a requested mechanism into masses, inertias, joints,
drivers, reference policy, step sizes, and error metrics. The paper role turns accepted claims into manuscript
text and demotes prose that exceeds the artifact state. The deterministic review role is implemented by
the local review artifacts cmame_submission_review_agent.py, validate_cmame_review_agent.py, and
CMAME_REVIEW_AGENT_REPORT.md/json.
    The most important design choice is that memory is stored in artifacts, not in hidden conversation state.
Table 2 gives the memory layout used by the agent. This makes the workflow reproducible across sessions
and across people in the lab: a new agent run can reconstruct the current claim boundary from files, rather
than relying on what a previous chat happened to remember.


                                Table 2: Memory objects used by the agent.
 Memory                   Artifact                                Role in the agent
 Contract memory          CURRENT_PIPELINE_CONTRACT.md            Defines the accepted method, allowed
                          and current status files                paper-facing claim, open gates, and forbidden
                                                                  overclaims.
 Version memory           version_ledger.csv, version re-         Records why each version exists, including failed
                          ports, and progression plots            attempts and blocker-driven turns.
 Proof memory             ORDER_PROOF_LEDGER.md, proof con-       Separates theorem assumptions, discharged
                          tracts, and traceability audits         lemmas, diagnostic probes, and retained
                                                                  conditions.
 Numerical memory         CSV rows, result matrices, plots, and   Stores errors, orders, residuals, ranks,
                          summary JSON files                      constraints, timings, and reference policies.
 Source-policy memory     cross-paper benchmark specifications    Prevents local diagnostics from becoming
                          and public-code runner summaries        external superiority claims before same-test
                                                                  campaigns close.
 Paper memory             manuscript text, figure manifests,      Ensures prose is synchronized with accepted
                          references, and submission-readiness    evidence rather than with stale ambitions.
                          notes


4.3    Step-level verification loop
Each agent action is run through a fixed verification loop. The loop is simple enough to be used repeatedly,
but strict enough to catch the common failure modes in integrator research:
  1. Load authority. Read the current contract, status, version ledger, proof ledger, result matrix, and
     source-policy specification.
  2. Pin identity. Freeze the MethodSpec and ProblemSpec for the proposed action, including residual
     rows, endpoint closure, solver tolerance, reference policy, and metrics.

  3. Choose sandbox. Classify the action as read-only validation, bounded probe, full artifact generation,
     or source-policy campaign.
  4. Run the smallest verifier. Prefer read-only claim audits and bounded probes before full regeneration;
     require explicit opt-in for heavy public same-test campaigns.

  5. Recompute evidence. Parse the generated CSV/JSON artifacts, recompute errors and observed
     orders, and compare them to the expected gate.



                                                        5
   6. Update claim state. Promote, demote, or leave claims unchanged according to the gate result; never
      promote a diagnostic row into a theorem input by prose alone.
   7. Write durable memory. Update ledgers, reports, and paper text only after the verifier state and
      claim state agree.


Algorithm 1 Verifier-centered research step
Require: Current ledgers L, proposed action a, method/problem state (M, P)
Ensure: Updated evidence E ′ and claim state C ′ , or a recorded nonpromotion
 1: Read the pipeline contract, version ledger, proof ledger, result matrix, and source-policy specification
 2: Freeze the MethodSpec and ProblemSpec for a
 3: Select the smallest sandbox level s ∈ {L0, L1, L2, L3}
 4: Run the verifier allowed by s and parse generated CSV/JSON/PDF artifacts
 5: if the verifier changes method identity or reference policy unexpectedly then
 6:     demote the result to diagnostic and record the mismatch
 7: else if the verifier closes all requirements for a claim then
 8:     promote the claim only through the corresponding ClaimSpec transition
 9: else
10:     keep the claim open and record the missing gate
11: end if
12: Run reviewer-agent checks against the updated manuscript/prose boundary
13: if reviewer flags overclaim or stale evidence then
14:     revise prose, table row, or claim state; do not promote without a verifier rerun
15: end if
16: Write durable memory: reports, ledgers, result matrix, and manuscript text


    This loop is deliberately conservative. For example, if a closed-loop four-link residual is small but there
is no accepted residual-to-error theorem, the agent writes “closed-loop consistency evidence” rather than
“accepted dynamic sixth-order evidence.” If a sparse Jacobian pattern is exact but the dense automatic-
differentiation backend is faster in wall-clock measurements, the agent writes “sparse structure verified” rather
than “sparse speed superiority.”

4.4    Reviewer agent
The workflow also includes a reviewer agent. This is not a second authoring agent that rewrites the paper
freely. It is a read-only critic whose job is to compare the manuscript against the current artifacts and
return findings that force another update pass. The reviewer agent is useful because the authoring agent is
biased toward coherence: after it has written a clean narrative, it may miss that a phrase quietly exceeds the
ledger. The reviewer agent is biased toward contradiction. In the current package, this lane is represented by
cmame_submission_review_agent.py, validated by validate_cmame_review_agent.py, and summarized
in CMAME_REVIEW_AGENT_REPORT.md/json. The report may accept the narrowed claim while still keeping
global source-policy and reproducibility submission readiness false.




                                                       6
                                    authoring lane

          Contract                  MethodSpec                       Bounded
          memory                    ProblemSpec                     hypothesis


                                                                                       mismatch
       Reviewer                    Verifier                          Sandbox          or open gate   Nonpromotion
        agent                   CSV/JSON/PDF                          L0–L3                            boundary



                                    ClaimSpec                         Durable
                                    transition                        memory

                                         verification and claim-control lane


Figure 1: The method architecture becomes a verifier target. The agent must keep the residual, proof
boundary, validators, and artifact layer synchronized instead of treating the implementation as an opaque
script.


               Table 3: Reviewer-agent checklist used before accepting a manuscript update.
 Review question               Evidence checked                                Revision trigger
 Does the evolution story      version_ledger.csv,     version reports,        A version is described as a success when
 match the ledger?             and current contract                            the ledger records it as a blocker,
                                                                               diagnostic, or partial result.
 Are ASME rows correctly       ASME CSV rows, result matrix, and cur-          Four-link or slider-crank coverage is
 classified?                   rent pipeline contract                          written as accepted dynamic-order
                                                                               proof.
 Are reference policies ex-    Example CSVs, cross-paper benchmark             A local self-reference, analytic reference,
 plicit?                       spec, and result matrix                         and public-source reference are mixed in
                                                                               one comparison.
 Are proof assumptions still   Proof ledger, proof contract gate, and          P1/P2/P3/P4/P6 retained conditions,
 visible?                      traceability audit                              P7, or ηh solver-policy boundaries
                                                                               disappear from prose.
 Are external claims over-     v048 source-policy summary and cross-           Bounded public-code pilots are written
 promoted?                     paper benchmark spec                            as source-policy external superiority.
 Is the paper status over-     current contract, proof audit, and              A mechanically buildable PDF is called
 stated?                       package-status files                            globally submission-ready.


     The update rule is: authoring pass, reviewer pass, revision pass, and then build verification. A reviewer
finding can demote a claim, require a new artifact citation, split a table row into accepted and diagnostic lanes,
or force an explicit limitation paragraph. A reviewer finding cannot by itself promote a result. Promotion
still requires the relevant verifier sandbox and claim-state transition.

4.5    Claim state machine
Each claim is assigned one of five states:
Hypothesis. A candidate method, repair, or comparison idea that has not yet passed a gate.
Diagnostic. Evidence that is useful for understanding the system but not sufficient for a paper claim.
Accepted. A claim whose required validators and ledgers agree.
Open. A known blocker remains active.


                                                         7
Forbidden. The wording conflicts with the current gate state and must be removed or demoted.
The important feature is reversibility. A claim can move backward when a validator exposes stale prose, a
mismatched reference policy, or a proof obligation that was previously hidden.


5     Verifier Sandbox
The verifier sandbox constrains what the agent can run and what the resulting output is allowed to mean.
Four levels are used:

                                        Table 4: Verifier sandbox levels.
 Level       Sandbox                       Allowed question                     Forbidden by default
 L0          Read-only validators           Do current claims match             Regenerating results or
                                            current artifacts?                  changing status.
 L1          Target audit                   Can one bounded hypothesis          Promoting claims or rewriting
                                            falsify a local gap?                ledgers.
 L2          Full generator                 After method-code changes, do       Using stale ledgers after
                                            version-wide artifacts              regeneration.
                                            regenerate?
 L3          External       source-policy   Do public same-test rows close      Running expensive or
             campaign                       under explicit policy?              policy-sensitive campaigns
                                                                                without opt-in.

    This structure matters because different questions have different blast radii. A paper-editing question
should usually be answered by a read-only validator, not by rerunning a full historical generator. A source-
policy external campaign can be expensive, and its results affect paper-level claims; it should require explicit
human opt-in. Conversely, after method code is changed, a full artifact generator may be necessary because
old summaries are no longer authoritative.
    At each level, the verifier has a different definition of success. A useful agent must keep these definitions
separate, because a pass at one level does not imply a pass at another level.


                               Table 5: Step-level verifier outputs and nonclaims.
 Step            Verifier output                       Claim it can support            Claim it cannot support
 Contract au-    Accepted method name, order           Paper prose matches current     Numerical correctness or
 dit             claim, open caveats, and stale to-    artifacts                       theorem closure
                 kens
 Method audit    Residual-row count, endpoint map,     The implementation is the in-   Error order or external
                 solver policy, and stage variables    tended candidate                superiority
 Example au-     Mechanism parameters, drivers,        The benchmark is repro-         Method superiority across
 dit             step sizes, references, and metrics   ducible                         papers
 Convergence     Error table and observed slopes       Local asymptotic evidence un-   A theorem unless proof
 audit           from at least three step sizes        der the stated reference        conditions are closed
 Proof audit     Closed lemmas, retained assump-       Conditional theorem state-      Empirical validation of
                 tions, row certificates, and theo-    ment with explicit assump-      open assumptions
                 rem interface                         tions
 Source-policy   Matched public parameters, refer-     Same-test readiness or com-     External superiority if the
 audit           ences, work metrics, and runner       pleted same-test rows           campaign is not run
                 status


    In the case study, the sandbox prevents three concrete mistakes. First, endpoint projection evidence is
kept separate from raw residual and KKT closure evidence. Second, full-TFE replacement scans remain
diagnostic until they close the appropriate residual-substitution and order gates. Third, v048 same-test
scaffolds do not promote external-superiority claims until the source-policy campaign is actually run.


                                                         8
        Raw endpoint      record      Projection    separate from            only if proof gates close
                                                                    KKT closure                     Order claim
          residual                    diagnostic                     evidence                          gate



                                     CSV residuals                  Proof ledger
                                                 no direct promotion conditions
                                    and corrections

Figure 2: Endpoint closure is sandboxed as its own evidence stream. Projection, raw residual, and KKT
closure are recorded separately so that constraint repair does not silently become an order claim.


6     Proof Sandbox
The proof sandbox specifies what may enter the theorem. For the Gauss6/FullVA path, the current theorem-
facing route is a conditional direct residual-bridge route rather than a fully closed primitive Taylor-subterm
route. The proof ledger therefore records both accepted interfaces and retained conditions.
    The theorem is decomposed around a one-step map. Let ϕh denote the exact flow in a smooth reduced
        h the ideal three-stage Gauss map, and Ψh the implemented Gauss6/FullVA map after stage residual,
chart, ΨG                                          A

endpoint closure, and inexact Newton effects. The proof target is not to show that every piece of the
implementation is symbolically identical to a source-paper TFE residual. It is to show, under stated regularity
and solver assumptions, that the implemented map differs from the exact flow by a local defect of order h7 :

                              ∥ΨA                     7      7      7
                                h (y) − ϕh (y)∥ ≤ CG h + CA h + CE h + CN ηh .

If the Newton tube tolerance satisfies ηh ≤ cη h7 , then

                        ∥ΨA                       7
                          h (y) − ϕh (y)∥ ≤ Cloc h ,       Cloc = CG + CA + CE + CN cη .

One-step stability, ∥Ψh (y) − Ψh (ȳ)∥ ≤ (1 + Cs h)∥y − ȳ∥, then transfers the local defect to a global sixth-order
bound over [0, T ]:
                                                                exp(Cs T ) − 1 6
                                    max ∥yn − y(tn )∥ ≤ Cloc                   h .
                                 0≤nh≤T                              Cs
This is why the paper-facing claim is sixth order even when some smooth observed slopes are higher. The
observed slopes are evidence for the implemented path; the theorem is bounded by the closed proof obligations.


                               Table 6: Proof obligations tracked by the agent.
 ID          Obligation                                       Reason
 P1          Smooth reduced chart and FullVA lift                   Gauss order must transfer through
                                                                    constrained coordinates.
 P2          Compact-tube branch, stage Jacobian,                   Newton and endpoint closure must define a
             stability, and endpoint-closure interfaces             local one-step map on the accepted branch.
 P3          Runtime formula and                                    The implemented residual layout must be the
             automatic-differentiation oracle for the               residual being analyzed.
             132-row residual
 P4          Non-dynamic O(h7 ) residual certificate and            The 96 non-dynamic rows and endpoint
             endpoint perturbation interface                        effects must not lower the local defect order.
 P5          Newton–Euler dynamic rows discharged by                Dynamic force-balance rows cannot be
             direct substitution                                    hand-waved.
 P6          Solver residual ηh ≤ ch7                               Fixed production tolerances are not theorem
                                                                    inputs.
 P7          Residual-to-error theorem for surrogate rows           Mechanism residual checks are not
                                                                    automatically order proofs.



                                                          9
    The residual proof is then split by rows and by route. The current implementation has a 132-row FullVA
residual. The proof audit records a 96-row non-dynamic certificate and a 36-row dynamic Newton–Euler
direct-substitution check. These numbers matter because they prevent the agent from writing “all rows are
symbolically proved” when only a subset is proved by a particular lane.


                         Table 7: Residual-proof decomposition used by the agent.
 Block                  Rows or interface        Current status                How the agent uses it
 Non-dynamic resid-     96 residual rows         Closed for the direct         Supports the implemented
 ual certificate                                 O(h7 ) certificate lane       residual-defect block, not external
                                                                               comparison.
 Dynamic Newton–        36 rows                  Closed by direct substitu-    Prevents dynamic force-balance
 Euler rows                                      tion on the current route     rows from being treated as
                                                                               informal diagnostics.
 P-interface assump-    P1–P6                    Retained theorem condi-       Defines the conditional theorem
 tions                                           tions plus partial certifi-   statement and prevents
                                                 cates                         unconditional wording.
 Residual-to-error      P7                       Open                          Keeps closed-loop four-link and
 bridge                                                                        slider-crank residual checks as
                                                                               coverage/consistency evidence.
 Solver     tolerance   ηh ≤ cη h7               Theorem condition re-         Blocks fixed production
 route                                           tained; finite probes are     tolerances from becoming
                                                 diagnostics                   proof-level closure.



Algorithm 2 Proof-sandbox audit for the Gauss6/FullVA route
Require: 132-row residual implementation, proof ledger, Newton tolerance policy, ASME evidence rows
Ensure: Conditional theorem boundary and nonpromotion list
 1: Verify that the runtime formula and AD oracle identify the same 132 residual rows
 2: Check the 96 non-dynamic row certificate for O(h7 ) defect on the accepted lift
 3: Check the 36 Newton–Euler rows by direct substitution on the current route
 4: Retain P1/P2 compact-branch, smooth-lift, endpoint-closure, and stability assumptions
 5: Retain P6 unless ηh  tube
                              ≤ cη h7 is proved as a theorem-level solver policy
 6: if all local-defect blocks close under retained assumptions then
 7:     allow the conditional local defect O(h7 ) and global sixth-order statement
 8: end if
 9: if P7 residual-to-error obligations are not all closed then
10:     classify four-link/slider-crank residual rows as coverage and consistency only
11: end if
12: Forbid unconditional theorem, source-policy superiority, and residual-to-error promotion




                                                    10
        Exact flow             Ideal Gauss                   Implemented                  Global bound
           ϕh                      ΨGh                           ΨAh                         O(h6 )



                                  C G h7         CA h7                     C E h7                        CN η h
                             Gauss truncation stage bridge             endpoint closure             solver condition



                                             96 non-dynamic                36 dynamic                    P7 open
                                               O(h7 ) rows                 direct rows             no residual-to-error


Figure 3: Proof sandbox decomposition. The conditional theorem route is built from local-defect blocks and
row certificates, while P7 prevents closed-loop residual diagnostics from becoming trajectory-order proof.

    The P7 boundary is especially important for the four-link and slider-crank examples. The proof contract
records seven obligations that must close before closed-loop reaction residuals can be used as trajectory-error
or order proof:


                               Table 8: Open residual-to-error obligations for P7.
 ID           Blocking obligation
 P7.1         Dynamic residual identity.
 P7.2         Residual consistency rate O(h7 ).
 P7.3         Closed-loop DAE stability or inf–sup bound.
 P7.4         Calibrated non-floor-limited residual-to-error estimator.
 P7.5         Reference-floor exclusion.
 P7.6         Coarse-first accepted dynamic-order campaign.
 P7.7         Manuscript theorem and proof.


    The ledger separates an accepted lane from a diagnostic lane. Accepted evidence includes direct residual
bridge checks, automatic-differentiation-expanded row identities, and Newton–Euler direct-substitution
certificates for the current conditional route. Diagnostic evidence includes primitive Taylor fragments, fixed-
tolerance logs, residual-only closed-loop rows, and external source-policy rows. This separation is essential
because numerical evidence can support a theorem but cannot substitute for a theorem condition.


7     Numerical Example Ladder
The agent chooses numerical examples by the failure mode they expose. The ladder used in the case study is:

    1. SO(3) kinematics: right-action, chart, and log-map checks.
    2. Smooth mechanics: invariants and high-order smooth behavior.

    3. Constrained DAEs: position, velocity, and acceleration closure.
    4. Friction regimes: regularization width, pre-asymptotic order, and cost-to-recover order.
    5. ASME mechanisms: single pendulum, double pendulum, four-link, and slider-crank lower-pair coverage.

    6. External same-test baselines: matched parameters, references, errors, and work metrics.

   The ladder prevents premature promotion. The agent should not jump from a toy kinematics plot to a
paper claim about lower-pair multibody dynamics. Nor should it use a closed-loop residual row as an external
dynamic-order row until the missing residual-to-error or same-test campaign is closed.



                                                             11
8     Four ASME Example Protocols
The four ASME-style examples are not decorative demonstrations. They are verifiers with different jobs. The
agent therefore stores, for each example, the mechanism definition, the reference policy, the error norm, the
order formula, and the allowed claim state. This is the part of the workflow that prevents a visually plausible
mechanism animation from being overinterpreted as a method-order theorem.

8.1    Metric and reference policies
The examples do not share one universal error metric. The agent instead records the metric with the artifact
that produced it. This is a critical detail because the v047 closed-loop kinematic/reaction rows and the later
common-reference result matrix answer different questions.


                             Table 9: Metric policies for ASME-related artifacts.
 Artifact lane               Reference and steps            Metric                            Allowed use
 Single-pendulum analytic    Analytic driven-angle refer-   Position/velocity, orientation-   Accepted local
 method row                  ence; local method sweep       log, and angular-velocity er-     method-side
                             h = {0.20, 0.10, 0.05} over    rors from the method CSV          dynamic-order
                             T = 0.2                                                          evidence.
 Double-pendulum     local   Nested local Gauss6/FullVA     Orientation and angular-          Accepted local
 method row                  reference h = 0.005; tested    velocity errors plus constraint   method-side
                             h = {0.04, 0.02, 0.01} over    residual diagnostics              dynamic-order
                             T = 0.2                                                          evidence under the
                                                                                              local reference policy.
 Closed-loop         kine-   Local kinematic FullVA ref-    Trajectory L∞ consistency,        Four-link/slider-
 matic/reaction rows         erence h = 0.001; tested       constraint residuals, multi-      crank mechanism
                             h = {0.02, 0.01, 0.005} over   plier reconstruction, Newton–     coverage and
                             T = 0.2                        Euler residuals                   consistency only. The
                                                                                              near-floor slopes are
                                                                                              not dynamic-order
                                                                                              claims.
 Common-reference result     Common diagnostic sweep        Recorded     final_l2      or     Bounded
 matrix                      h = {0.1, 0.05, 0.025} with    final_linf; each cell reports     common-reference
                             reference h = 0.0125           observed order / finest-step      diagnostic. It is not
                                                            error                             source-policy external
                                                                                              superiority.


    Within any one lane, the observed order is computed only from errors produced under that same lane’s
reference and metric. With three nested step sizes h0 , h1 , h2 satisfying hi+1 = hi /2, the agent records the
log–log slope
                                                 log(eh0 /eh2 )
                                            pb =                ,
                                                  log(h0 /h2 )
with pairwise slopes and reference-floor warnings retained as diagnostics. If the finest errors are at roundoff
or reference-floor level, the row is not promoted to an asymptotic order claim even if the formal slope is
high. Constraint residuals and Newton–Euler residuals are stored separately; they are consistency diagnostics
unless the residual-to-error theorem closes.




                                                       12
Algorithm 3 Constructing one numerical evidence row
Require: Example m, method candidate, lane policy ℓ, step list H, reference policy r, metric d
Ensure: Evidence row with errors, observed order, diagnostics, and claim scope
 1: Load mechanism parameters, joints, drivers, initial state, horizon, and tolerances for m
 2: Generate or load the reference trajectory/state according to r
 3: for each h ∈ H do
 4:     Run the method under the lane policy ℓ
 5:     Compute the lane-specific error eh = d(yh , yref )
 6:     Record constraint residuals, Newton diagnostics, and reaction residuals separately
 7: end for
 8: Compute p  b = log(eh0 /eh2 )/ log(h0 /h2 ) and pairwise slopes
 9: if reference floor, nonmonotonic errors, or open P7/source-policy gate is detected then
10:     mark the row as diagnostic or coverage-only
11: else
12:     mark the row as accepted for the specific ClaimSpec it satisfies
13: end if
14: Write CSV/JSON/table entries with the reference, metric, finest error, order, and claim scope




             Table 10: Protocol summary for the four ASME examples and their evidence lanes.
 Example                Mechanism and reference            Compared quantities                Allowed interpretation
 Single pendulum        Driven ASME single pendulum;       COM position/velocity, orien-      Accepted local method-side
                        analytic driven-angle reference;   tation log error, angular veloc-   dynamic-order evidence;
                        T = 0.2, method-row h =            ity, drive residual diagnostics,   external rows remain
                        {0.20, 0.10, 0.05} and common-     and final-error matrix row.        diagnostics unless
                        matrix h = {0.1, 0.05, 0.025}.                                        source-policy closes.
 Double pendulum        Two-revolute ASME double           Orientation and angular ve-        Accepted local method-side
                        pendulum mapped to the Ful-        locity errors plus position-       dynamic-order evidence
                        lVA side method; nested local      , velocity-, and acceleration-     under the local reference
                        reference h = 0.005 for method     level constraint residuals.        policy; external rA
                        row; common-matrix reference                                          comparison remains
                        h = 0.0125.                                                           pending.
 Four-link      local   Driven closed-loop mechanism       Trajectory L∞ consistency,         Mechanism coverage and
 coverage               with 18 generalized coordinates    constraint residuals, and re-      closed-loop consistency, not
                        and 18 constraints; local kine-    constructed Newton–Euler re-       accepted dynamic-order
                        matic FullVA reference h =         action residuals.                  proof.
                        0.001; h = {0.02, 0.01, 0.005}.
 Four-link              Same mechanism in the paper        final_linf                posi-    Internal common-reference
 common-                result matrix; reference h =       tion/velocity/acceleration         diagnostic; not a
 reference      di-     0.0125; h = {0.1, 0.05, 0.025}.    errors reported as order /         source-policy or
 agnostic                                                  finest-step error.                 residual-to-error promotion.
 Slider-crank local     Closed-loop         slider-crank   Trajectory L∞ consistency,         Mechanism coverage and
 coverage               with DP1, DP2, coordinate-         multiplier reconstruction, and     closed-loop consistency, not
                        difference,    and      distance   translational/rotational dy-       accepted dynamic-order
                        constraints; local kinematic       namic residuals.                   proof.
                        FullVA reference h = 0.001;
                        h = {0.02, 0.01, 0.005}.
 Slider-crank           Same mechanism in the paper        final_linf               posi-     Internal common-reference
 common-                result matrix; reference h =       tion/velocity/acceleration         diagnostic; not external
 reference        di-   0.0125; h = {0.1, 0.05, 0.025}.    errors reported as order /         superiority and not
 agnostic                                                  finest-step error.                 residual-to-error closure.




                                                            13
      Table 11: Numerical evidence rows for the four ASME examples in the common-reference matrix.
 Example           Reference, metric, and                 Position/velocity order and         Acceleration row        Claim scope
                   sweep                                  finest error
 Single pendulum   Analytic driven-angle reference;       Position: 6.013 / 3.323×10−14 .     Not a promoted          Consistent with
                   final_l2; h = {0.1, 0.05, 0.025}.      Velocity: 5.801 / 1.155×10−12 .     matrix claim.           the accepted
                                                                                                                      local
                                                                                                                      dynamic-order
                                                                                                                      row; not
                                                                                                                      external
                                                                                                                      superiority.
 Double pendulum   Local Gauss6/FullVA final-state        Position: 6.011 / 3.100×10−13 .     Not a promoted          Common-
                   reference at h = 0.0125;               Velocity: 6.010 / 2.346×10−13 .     matrix claim.           reference
                   final_linf; same sweep.                                                                            diagnostic plus
                                                                                                                      accepted local
                                                                                                                      dynamic-order
                                                                                                                      row under its
                                                                                                                      own reference
                                                                                                                      policy.
 Four-link         Closed-loop endpoint reference         Position: 5.955 / 2.289×10−12 .     0.995 / 8.80×10−1 .     Coverage and
                   at h = 0.0125; final_linf; same        Velocity: 6.085 / 1.093×10−11 .                             consistency only;
                   sweep.                                                                                             P7 blocks
                                                                                                                      dynamic-order
                                                                                                                      promotion.
 Slider-crank      Closed-loop endpoint reference         Position: 6.164 / 8.583×10−12 .     1.054 / 1.04×10−1 .     Coverage and
                   at h = 0.0125; final_linf; same        Velocity: 7.341 / 9.189×10−12 .                             consistency only;
                   sweep.                                                                                             P7 blocks
                                                                                                                      dynamic-order
                                                                                                                      promotion.




                                   method evidence lane                    matrix diagnostic lane                   claim boundary


        Single                       analytic/local                         common-reference                          accepted
      pendulum                       dynamic order                        final-error diagnostic                     local claim


       Double                         nested local                          common-reference                          accepted
      pendulum                       dynamic order                        final-error diagnostic                     local claim


                                    local kinematic                         common-reference                          P7 open:
      Four-link
                                   reaction coverage                      final-error diagnostic                    no promotion


        Slider                      local kinematic                         common-reference                          P7 open:
        crank                      reaction coverage                      final-error diagnostic                    no promotion


Figure 4: ASME evidence lanes. The examples share a result matrix but do not share the same claim
status: single and double support local dynamic-order evidence, while four-link and slider-crank remain
coverage/consistency until P7 closes.

8.2     Single pendulum
The single-pendulum example is the cleanest dynamic-order verifier because the drive provides an analytic
reference. The public mechanism uses a length 4 m body, square side length 0.05 m, density 7800 kg/m3 ,
gravity 9.81 m/s2 , and a DP1 drive of the form
                                                π π        
                                            cos    + cos(2t) .
                                                 2  4
The local Gauss6/FullVA row solves right-Lie orientation increments together with center-of-mass position,
velocity, acceleration, angular velocity, angular acceleration, pivot reaction, axis multipliers, and drive
multiplier. The residual includes pivot position, pivot velocity, pivot acceleration, revolute-axis DP1 rows,
and acceleration-level drive closure.
    The reference is the analytic driven angle and its derivatives, sampled on the same grid as the numerical
result. The primary comparisons are position, velocity, orientation, and angular velocity. In the current


                                                                 14
accepted row, the three-step sweep reports observed orders approximately 6.073 for position, 6.033 for velocity,
6.055 for orientation, and 6.024 for angular velocity. This is why the row supports the local sixth-order
method claim.

8.3     Double pendulum
The double-pendulum row tests whether the FullVA mechanism survives a genuine two-joint coupled sys-
tem. The ASME mechanism has two bodies of lengths 4 m and 2 m, square side length 0.05 m, density
7800 kg/m3 , gravity 9.81 m/s2 , and two revolute joints. The local mapping uses the v029-style double-revolute
Gauss6/FullVA side method. Public zero initial angular speeds are regularized by opposite 10−12 perturbations
to avoid a singular local convention; this regularization is recorded as part of the ProblemSpec and is not
hidden.
    The reference is a nested local Gauss6/FullVA trajectory at h = 0.005, while the tested step sizes are
h = {0.04, 0.02, 0.01} over T = 0.2. The accepted comparisons are orientation and angular velocity errors, with
constraint residuals retained as consistency checks. The current row reports observed orders approximately
6.101 for orientation and 6.089 for angular velocity. This is accepted method-side dynamic-order evidence,
but it is not yet a same-test public rA superiority claim because the public-source reference and work-policy
campaign is a separate v048 gate.

8.4     Four-link
The four-link row is deliberately tagged differently. The mechanism has three moving bodies with masses 2, 1, 1
and inertias (4, 2, 0), (12.4, 0.01, 0), and (4.54, 0.01, 0) under the local convention. The driver is cos(πt + π/2).
The local closed-loop kinematic FullVA system uses 18 generalized coordinates and 18 constraints, including
six DP1 rows and twelve coordinate-difference rows. The recorded minimum singular value of the kinematic
constraint Jacobian is about 7.92 × 10−2 , with condition number about 1.17 × 102 .
    The v047 local coverage reference is a kinematic FullVA trajectory at h = 0.001, while the coverage sweep
uses h = {0.02, 0.01, 0.005} over T = 0.2. That sweep is a nested sampling and reproducibility check: the
recorded trajectory errors are near the reference floor and the formal slopes are not interpreted as dynamic
order. A separate multiplier reconstruction checks
                                                                        
                                               ⊤             F − Ma 
                                             Φq λ =                        ,
                                                       − Jα + ω × Jω

and records Newton–Euler residuals around 10−13 . This supports closed-loop consistency, not an external-order
claim.
    The paper result matrix has a separate common-reference diagnostic lane for the same mechanism. There,
the local Gauss6/FullVA row uses h = {0.1, 0.05, 0.025}, reference h = 0.0125, and final_linf errors.
That lane reports position/velocity slopes about 5.955 and 6.085 with finest position/velocity errors about
2.289 × 10−12 and 1.093 × 10−11 . Because this lane is a common-reference diagnostic and because P7 remains
open, those slopes are not promoted into closed-loop dynamic-order proof.

8.5     Slider-crank
The slider-crank example stresses mixed lower-pair constraints. The public mechanism distinguishes the
2021 and 2022 parameter policies; the local 2021-style row uses masses 0.12, 0.5, and 2 with inertias
(10−4 , 10−5 , 10−4 ), (4 × 10−3 , 4 × 10−4 , 4 × 10−3 ), and (10−4 , 10−4 , 10−4 ). The driver is cos(−2πt + π/2). The
local constraint inventory includes seven DP1 rows, four DP2 rows, six coordinate-difference rows, and one
distance row, with a recorded minimum singular value about 7.25 × 10−2 and condition number about 43.6.
    As in the four-link case, the v047 local coverage reference is a kinematic FullVA trajectory at h = 0.001 with
h = {0.02, 0.01, 0.005} over T = 0.2. Those local kinematic rows record near-floor trajectory and constraint
consistency; they are not the source of a dynamic-order claim. The reconstructed reaction-dynamics residuals
are near 6 × 10−15 across the sweep.
    The result matrix again contains a separate common-reference diagnostic lane with h = {0.1, 0.05, 0.025},
reference h = 0.0125, and final_linf errors. That lane reports position/velocity slopes about 6.164 and


                                                          15
7.341 with finest position/velocity errors about 8.583 × 10−12 and 9.189 × 10−12 . The acceleration slope is
not used as a method-order claim because the acceleration column is dominated by reconstruction and floor
behavior. The correct paper wording is therefore “slider-crank closed-loop coverage plus common-reference
diagnostics,” not “accepted slider-crank dynamic sixth-order proof” and not “public baseline superiority.”


9     Versioned Case Study: v001 to v048
The version history is the strongest evidence that the agent must be domain-specific. The versions are not a
changelog; they are a record of blockers. Each phase added a verifier because the previous phase exposed a
new way an integrator could fail.
   The baseline before v001 was a conventional research workflow: implement a candidate formula, run a
small number of scripts, inspect convergence plots, and then summarize the result in prose. That workflow is
adequate for many ordinary software experiments, but it breaks down for this project because the same word
“method” can hide different residuals, endpoint policies, reference solutions, and proof assumptions. The shift
from the baseline to v001 was therefore not merely the creation of a first script. It was the first attempt
to make method identity auditable. The shift from v001 to the current v048 endpoint was then driven by
successive discoveries that a new piece of the research state had to be made explicit.


                           Table 12: Blocker-driven evolution of the research pipeline.
 Versions                  Phase                       Why the project evolved
 v001–v005                 Lie-group basics               Establish SO(3) order, right-action conventions, and
                                                          smooth Gauss mechanics before adding constraints.
 v006–v013                 Constrained DAE closure        Endpoint position, velocity, and acceleration
                                                          consistency became explicit verifier targets.
 v014–v022                 Friction regimes               Sharp regularized friction exposed delayed asymptotic
                                                          behavior and cost-to-recover-order questions.
 v023–v029                 FullVA emergence               Absolute-coordinate lower-pair attempts exposed
                                                          endpoint velocity/acceleration consistency failures.
 v030–v045                 Solver scaling                 Dense Jacobians and dense solves became bottlenecks,
                                                          so sparse pattern and coloring audits became separate
                                                          claims.
 v046–v048                 Claim gates and external       ASME examples, proof ledgers, paper packages, and
                           policy                         same-test scaffolds became first-class objects.



    Baseline        v001–v005        v006–v013       v014–v022        v023–v029       v030–v045      v046–v048
scripts + prose     Lie basics      DAE closure       friction         FullVA           scaling      claim gates



                  method identity    pos/vel/acc     regime split    residual rows   speed policy    proof/source



Figure 5: Version evolution as a sequence of forced verifier additions. The pipeline did not evolve because
later versions were cosmetically cleaner; it evolved because each phase exposed a new ambiguity that the
agent had to make auditable.




                                                         16
            Table 13: Fine-grained evolution from baseline to the current v048 endpoint.
Stage         What was learned                Why the next stage was                Verifier added
                                              needed
Baseline      Public mechanisms, source-      The workflow could not distin-        Claim-state boundary and
              paper TFE ideas, and local      guish formula comparison, source-     durable artifact memory.
              scripts existed as separate     code reproduction, and paper
              objects.                        claim readiness.
v001          First SO(3) benchmark           Correct SO(3) motion was neces-       Right-action and log-map
              suite gave a controlled Lie-    sary but not enough; action con-      orientation checks.
              group kinematics baseline.      vention and chart choice could
                                              silently change the method.
v002–v005     CF4/RKMK4            repairs,   Smooth unconstrained order did        Smooth mechanics
              SBEL       rA      reproduc-    not test DAE closure, lower-pair      convergence and invariant
              tion, Yoshida midpoint,         constraints, or endpoint veloc-       checks.
              and Gauss-Lie4 smooth           ity/acceleration consistency.
              mechanics clarified fourth-
              order behavior.
v006–v008     Fixed-pivot and absolute-       Endpoint constraints had to in-       Position/velocity/acceleration
              coordinate DAE experi-          clude position, velocity, and ac-     closure validators.
              ments showed that position      celeration levels, otherwise pro-
              closure alone was insuffi-      jections could mask method drift.
              cient.
v009–v013     Quaternion/JAX/Gauss6           The agent needed to separate          Smooth-vs-sharp friction
              variants achieved smooth        smooth theorem evidence from          sweeps and
              high order but exposed          nonsmooth or regularized-friction     cost-to-recover-order
              sharp-friction order reduc-     regimes.                              diagnostics.
              tion.
v014–v022     Brown–McPhee and rev-           The next blocker was no longer        Friction-width ledgers and
              olute benchmark stages          scalar accuracy; it was lower-pair    benchmark-specific
              studied friction smoothness,    absolute-coordinate residual de-      diagnostics.
              adaptivity, and cost.           sign.
v023–v029     Full absolute revolute DAE      Endpoint velocity and accelera-       FullVA residual-row audits
              attempts evolved toward         tion consistency became the cen-      and double-revolute
              Off-axis FullVA and double-     tral method identity issue.           dynamic-order rows.
              revolute FullVA.
v030–v045     Sparse     CSR      Newton,     Exact sparsity did not imply run-     Sparse-pattern certificates and
              matrix-free        attempts,    time superiority; speed claims        dense-vs-sparse timing
              lagging, colored JVP/VJP,       needed their own evidence policy.     caveats.
              symbolic pattern, and
              pattern cache studied
              scaling.
v046–v047     Four ASME examples,             The paper could now build             ASME result matrix, proof
              proof contracts, paper          mechanically, but source-policy       traceability audit, paper-claim
              package, and claim audits       and global submission-readiness       audit.
              were integrated.                claims were still open.
v048          Same-test external bench-       External superiority still required   Cross-paper source-policy
              mark scaffold and public-       matched public parameters, ref-       spec and opt-in external
              code pilot rows were added.     erences, work metrics, and com-       campaign gate.
                                              pleted campaigns.




                                                      17
                                Table 14: Compact version ladder, v001–v012.
Version   Research turn                                            Verifier or claim-boundary effect
v001      First reproducible SO(3) benchmark suite.                Created benchmark memory before high-order claims.
v002      Corrected right-action CF4/RKMK4 fourth-order            Made action convention and log-map order checks explicit.
          kinematics.
v003      Reproduced SBEL/Negrut rA code path.                     Added a source-code reproducibility anchor, not a high-order
                                                                   claim.
v004      Added Yoshida-composed Lie midpoint mechanics.           Recorded that negative substeps are poor for friction/contact.
v005      Added two-stage Gauss-Lie4 smooth mechanics.             Established smooth unconstrained order and invariant checks.
v006      Moved to reduced fixed-pivot DAE.                        Separated exact reconstruction from full absolute-coordinate
                                                                   DAE.
v007      Implemented absolute-coordinate Gauss DAE.               Exposed the need for position, velocity, and acceleration
                                                                   consistency.
v008      Internalized endpoint constraints in the Newton          Reduced reliance on endpoint projection.
          solve.
v009      Added smooth and sharp regularized friction.             Split smooth-order evidence from sharp-friction order reduction.
v010      Replaced finite-difference Jacobians with JAX AD.        Made nonlinear-solve backend evidence a separate lane.
v011      Implemented quaternion transport operators.              Bridged local SO(3) residuals to paper-style S3 transport.
v012      Embedded quaternion endpoint DAE residual.               Verified quaternion residual identity before increasing order.




                                Table 15: Compact version ladder, v013–v024.
Version   Research turn                                            Verifier or claim-boundary effect
v013      Added Gauss6 endpoint collocation.                       Produced sixth-order smooth evidence while preserving
                                                                   sharp-friction caveats.
v014      Swept friction smoothness.                               Turned “Gauss6 is worth it” into a regime-dependent claim.
v015      Added adaptive Gauss6/Gauss4 controller.                 Quantified near-nonsmooth cost/accuracy tradeoffs.
v016      Added reduced Lie-trapezoidal baseline.                  Ruled out a favorable low-order baseline as the main winner.
v017      Added reduced Lie-BDF2 baseline.                         Kept robustness evidence separate from accuracy leadership.
v018      Tested Lobatto endpoint collocation.                     Prevented simple TFE-style endpoint-node substitution from
                                                                   being overclaimed.
v019      Added reaction-dependent friction.                       Connected multiplier/reaction loads to the residual.
v020      Added adaptive lambda-friction controller.               Quantified sharp lambda-friction recovery.
v021      Added Brown–McPhee-style friction.                       Moved from surrogate friction toward paper-like continuous
                                                                   friction.
v022      Added revolute Brown–McPhee benchmark.                   Made a paper-like one-DOF revolute friction verifier.
v023      Built full absolute-coordinate revolute DAE.             Exposed endpoint velocity and formulation fragility.
v024      Tried direct Lobatto full revolute DAE.                  Recorded failure of simple Gauss-to-Lobatto node replacement.




                                Table 16: Compact version ladder, v025–v036.
Version   Research turn                                            Verifier or claim-boundary effect
v025      Added endpoint projection repair.                        Separated practical constraint repair from unchanged
                                                                   one-step-map claims.
v026      Added stage pivot-velocity residual.                     Made velocity closure a residual-row target.
v027      Added stage pivot-acceleration residual.                 Made acceleration closure a residual-row target.
v028      Added off-axis FullVA residual.                          Checked axis velocity/acceleration consistency under off-axis
                                                                   torque.
v029      Extended to double-revolute interbody system.            Showed FullVA generalizes and exposed sparse/block Newton
                                                                   needs.
v030      Measured double-revolute Jacobian sparsity and           Turned solver scaling into a separate evidence lane.
          CSR timing.
v031      Integrated CSR sparse solves into Newton.                Showed sparse solves preserve trajectory but still depend on
                                                                   dense AD materialization.
v032      Tested JVP-GMRES matrix-free Newton.                     Recorded matrix-free failure without preconditioning.
v033      Tested lagged sparse Newton.                             Recorded that reduced Jacobian refreshes did not materially
                                                                   improve runtime.
v034      Tested colored-JVP sparse assembly.                      Verified sparse AD correctness but rejected it as small-system
                                                                   speed winner.
v035      Batched colored JVP seeds.                               Improved sparse AD runtime while retaining exactness checks.
v036      Generated block-symbolic sparse pattern.                 Removed dense warm-up as the only pattern source.




                                                              18
                                  Table 17: Compact version ladder, v037–v048.
 Version    Research turn                                             Verifier or claim-boundary effect
 v037       Pruned symbolic pattern with JVP dry-runs.                Recovered exact observed sparsity without dense Jacobian
                                                                      discovery.
 v038       Reused cached JVP-pruned pattern.                         Added cache/reuse policy for nearby regimes.
 v039       Extended to triple-revolute topology.                     Tested sparse AD beyond the two-body case.
 v040       Generated block pattern for triple revolute.              Made larger-topology pattern acquisition more production-like.
 v041       Added cache refresh/union policy.                         Recorded stale-cache detection and refresh rules.
 v042       Added skew-axis triple-revolute lower pairs.              Tested non-coplanar lower-pair geometry.
 v043       Added skew prismatic lower pair.                          Added non-revolute coverage while preserving sparse-speed
                                                                      caveat.
 v044       Added double-prismatic interbody chain.                   Exposed high color count and dense-backend competitiveness.
 v045       Added row-colored VJP sparse AD.                          Reduced seed count but retained dense-runtime caveat.
 v046       Validated upstream ASME rA examples.                      Created four-example public/reproducibility anchor without a
                                                                      Gauss6 method claim.
 v047       Built cylindrical-chain Gauss6/FullVA pipeline and        Integrated 132-row residual, proof audits, ASME evidence,
            claim gates.                                              smooth-order evidence, caveats, and paper-package validators.
 v048       Built same-test external benchmark harness.               Added public-code pilots and source-policy scaffolding while
                                                                      keeping external superiority false.



   This evolution explains why the current agent records negative and partial results instead of deleting
them. v004 was useful because negative substeps were poor for friction/contact. v013 was useful because the
same Gauss6 path showed smooth order near six but sharp-friction pre-asymptotic order around the low-order
regime. v030–v045 were useful because they showed that a correct sparse pattern did not automatically
beat a dense automatic differentiation implementation. v048 is useful even though it does not close external
superiority, because it turns the public comparison into a structured source-policy campaign rather than a
prose-level aspiration.


                               Table 18: Evidence-state matrix used by the agent.
 Evidence lane           Single pendulum                   Double pendulum                   Four-link                   Slider-
                                                                                                                         crank
 Local dynamic-order     Accepted;                         Accepted; nested local            Not used as local           Not used
 method row              analytic/reference-               reference order evidence          dynamic-order proof         as local
                         policy order evidence                                                                           dynamic-
                                                                                                                         order
                                                                                                                         proof
 Local          kine-    Reaction reconstruction           Constraint residual diag-         Accepted coverage and       Accepted
 matic/reaction          diagnostic                        nostic                            reaction consistency        coverage
 coverage                                                                                                                and
                                                                                                                         reaction
                                                                                                                         consis-
                                                                                                                         tency
 Common-reference        Internal order/error diag-        Internal order/error diag-        Internal final-error di-    Internal
 result matrix           nostic                            nostic                            agnostic only               final-
                                                                                                                         error
                                                                                                                         diagnos-
                                                                                                                         tic only
 External     source-    Open;     no superiority          Open;        no superiority       Open; no superiority        Open; no
 policy claim            claim                             claim                             claim                       superior-
                                                                                                                         ity claim
 Proof    promotion      Conditional sixth-order           Conditional sixth-order           Blocked      by    P7       Blocked
 boundary                method claim                      method claim                      residual-to-error obli-     by P7
                                                                                             gations                     residual-
                                                                                                                         to-error
                                                                                                                         obliga-
                                                                                                                         tions


   The evolution has two methodological implications. First, a version should be created when the research
question changes, not when a script is cosmetically edited. Second, negative results are useful artifacts. A


                                                                 19
Figure 6: Smooth convergence evidence for the current local Gauss6/FullVA path. The observed slopes
support the method evidence, while the theorem claim remains bounded by the proof ledger.


failed TFE replacement candidate that records rank, residual, and missing span prevents the next agent run
from rediscovering the same failure.


10     Current Evidence Boundary
10.1    Accepted local method evidence
The current accepted local method object is the Gauss6/FullVA path. It has three Gauss stages and 132
FullVA residual rows. The smooth cylindrical-chain h-sweep records observed position/velocity orders about
7.161/7.066. The paper-facing method claim is conditional sixth order, not seventh order, and not full
source-paper residual reproduction.

10.2    ASME mechanism evidence
The four ASME-style mechanisms enter the current method evidence system: single pendulum, double
pendulum, four-link, and slider-crank. The current boundary distinguishes dynamic-order evidence from
mechanism coverage. Single- and double-pendulum rows support accepted method-side dynamic-order
evidence. Four-link and slider-crank rows support closed-loop kinematic FullVA coverage and reaction-
dynamics consistency; they are not promoted into accepted asymptotic dynamic-order proof without a
stronger theorem or campaign.




                                                   20
               single
                                                 DP1
             pendulum



              double                                                                coverage
                                                 CD                                  verifier
             pendulum



                                                 DP2                              not external
              four-link                                                            superiority



               slider                             D
               crank

Figure 7: The lower-pair graph bridge connects mechanism examples to constraint families. It is a coverage
and consistency verifier, not by itself an external-superiority claim.




Figure 8: Two caveats that the agent must preserve: sharp-friction smoothness and sparse-backend runtime.
Both are useful evidence streams, but neither supports an overbroad claim.


10.3    Open caveats
The current caveats are not secondary details; they are part of the method. Sharp-friction coarse-regime order
remains practically reduced even though ultra refinement can recover high-order behavior at quantified cost.
Sparse structure is correct and quantified, but the dense jacfwd backend remains faster in recorded wall-clock
evidence. Full source-paper TFE stage replacement remains open. External source-policy superiority remains
false because the full same-test benchmark campaign has not been run.

10.4    Claim boundary
Figure 9 summarizes the paper-facing boundary. The accepted claim is a narrowed conditional method claim.
Diagnostic evidence remains available for future research, but not all diagnostics become claims. Open gates
include source-policy external campaigns, full TFE stage replacement, and source-policy runner-package
completeness.


11     Discussion
11.1    What the agent changes
The proposed agent changes the research workflow in three ways. First, it turns method identity into data. A
candidate is not just a code path; it is a MethodSpec whose residual rows, endpoint map, solver policy, and
theorem conditions can be audited. Second, it makes execution policy explicit. The agent decides whether
a question needs a read-only validator, a bounded probe, a full generator, or an external campaign before



                                                       21
         Evidence               Required             ClaimSpec
          artifact               verifier               state



                                  Accepted           Diagnostic            Open               Forbidden
                                 conditional          use only             gate                wording



                               Gauss6/FullVA        TFE proxy             P7, source           global
                                 order six          public pilots        policy, TFE         superiority


Figure 9: The claim boundary is part of the agent interface. Accepted evidence, diagnostics, and open gates
are shown together so that paper prose cannot silently exceed the artifacts.


running commands. Third, it turns paper writing into a claim-state transition rather than a summarization
task.
    This does not remove the human researcher. The human still chooses the scientific direction: whether to
prioritize a stronger TFE replacement, a better sparse backend, a closed-loop dynamic-order theorem, or
an external source-policy campaign. The agent’s role is to prevent the chosen direction from corrupting the
existing evidence boundary.

11.2    Why generic agents are insufficient
A generic coding agent can edit scripts and run tests, but integrator research requires a different notion of
correctness. The unit of progress is not “test passed.” It is “a specific claim state changed under a specific
evidence policy.” Without this discipline, an agent is likely to make the most common research mistakes:
collapsing diagnostics into claims, comparing against mismatched baselines, or describing a mechanically
buildable package as submission-ready.

11.3    Limitations
This paper is a methodology and case-study paper, not a controlled evaluation of agent productivity across
laboratories. The architecture is grounded in a single research tree for Lie-group multibody integrators.
The numerical values reported here summarize local artifacts rather than newly executed experiments. The
current v047/v048 state is also intentionally incomplete: source-policy external superiority is false, full TFE
stage replacement is not accepted, and full global submission readiness is not claimed. These limitations are
not hidden; they are exactly the boundaries that the agent is designed to preserve.


12     Conclusion
Auto-research agents for numerical-method development should be built around verifiers, not around uncon-
strained autonomy. In Lie-group multibody integrator research, the agent must preserve method identity,
choose sandbox levels, separate theorem inputs from diagnostics, select numerical examples by failure mode,
and write claims through a state machine. The v001–v048 case study shows why this structure is necessary:
each phase of the project exposed a new failure mode, and each failure mode required a new verifier. The
current Gauss6/FullVA pipeline demonstrates a bounded but useful result: a conditional sixth-order local
method claim with strong smooth evidence and four ASME mechanism rows, while retaining explicit caveats
around full TFE replacement, external source-policy campaigns, sparse speed, and sharp-friction cost. A
good agent in this setting is therefore not the one that writes the boldest paper. It is the one that keeps the
paper aligned with the proof ledger and the artifacts.


Data and Artifact Availability
The manuscript draft is based on local project artifacts in the lie_group_integrator_work tree:


                                                      22
   • CURRENT_PIPELINE_CONTRACT.md;
   • version_ledger.csv;
   • ORDER_PROOF_LEDGER.md;
   • paper_v047_cylindrical_chain/CURRENT_STATUS_CN.md;

   • paper_v047_cylindrical_chain/PAPER_NUMERICAL_RESULT_MATRIX.md;
   • paper_v047_cylindrical_chain/CROSS_PAPER_BENCHMARK_SPEC.md;
   • paper_v047_cylindrical_chain/CMAME_PROOF_CONTRACT_GATE.md;

   • paper_v047_cylindrical_chain/PROOF_CLAIM_TRACEABILITY_AUDIT.md;
   • v047_cylindrical_chain_pipeline/results/summary_v047.json;
   • v048_cross_paper_same_test_benchmarks/results/summary_v048.json.
The numerical plots are drawn from the corresponding v047 paper figure directory; architecture, proof,
ASME-lane, and claim-boundary diagrams are rendered as LaTeX/TikZ vector figures in this source. This
draft revision also records its local reviewer pass in integrator_agent_methodology_review_audit.md.


Acknowledgments
This draft frames a methodology for coordinating lab-scale integrator research. It uses the Simulation-Based
Engineering Laboratory’s versioned multibody integrator artifacts as the running case study.


References
 [1] E. Chaturvedi, C. Sandu, and A. Sandu. Higher-order integration of index-3 DAE with friction using
     time finite elements on Lie groups. Multibody System Dynamics, 2026. doi:10.1007/s11044-026-10153-w.
 [2] W. Kim and J. N. Reddy. A new family of higher-order time integration algorithms for the analysis of
     structural dynamics. Journal of Applied Mechanics, 84(7):071008, 2017. doi:10.1115/1.4036821.
 [3] E. Hairer and G. Wanner. Solving Ordinary Differential Equations II: Stiff and Differential-Algebraic
     Problems. Springer, Berlin, 1996.
 [4] C. W. Gear, B. Leimkuhler, and G. K. Gupta. Automatic integration of Euler–Lagrange equations with
     constraints. Journal of Computational and Applied Mathematics, 12–13:77–90, 1985. doi:10.1016/0377-
     0427(85)90008-1.
 [5] H. Munthe-Kaas. Runge–Kutta methods on Lie groups. BIT Numerical Mathematics, 38:92–111, 1998.

 [6] H. Munthe-Kaas. High order Runge–Kutta methods on manifolds. Applied Numerical Mathematics,
     29:115–127, 1999.
 [7] O. Bruls, A. Cardona, and M. Arnold. Lie group generalized-alpha time integration of
     constrained flexible multibody systems. Mechanism and Machine Theory, 48:121–137, 2012.
     doi:10.1016/j.mechmachtheory.2011.07.017.
 [8] V. Wieloch and M. Arnold. BDF integrators for constrained mechanical systems on Lie groups. Journal
     of Computational and Applied Mathematics, 387:112517, 2021. doi:10.1016/j.cam.2019.112517.
 [9] L. O. Jay. Symplectic partitioned Runge–Kutta methods for constrained Hamiltonian systems. SIAM
     Journal on Numerical Analysis, 33(1):368–387, 1996. doi:10.1137/0733019.



                                                    23
[10] J. E. Marsden and M. West. Discrete mechanics and variational integrators. Acta Numerica, 10:357–514,
     2001. doi:10.1017/S096249290100006X.
[11] S. Leyendecker, J. E. Marsden, and M. Ortiz. Variational integrators for constrained dynamical systems.
     ZAMM, 88(9):677–708, 2008. doi:10.1002/zamm.200700173.
[12] D. E. Stewart and J. C. Trinkle. An implicit time-stepping scheme for rigid body dynamics with
     inelastic collisions and Coulomb friction. International Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering,
     39(15):2673–2691, 1996. doi:10.1002/(SICI)1097-0207(19960815)39:15<2673::AID-NME972>3.0.CO;2-I.
[13] M. Anitescu and F. A. Potra. Formulating dynamic multi-rigid-body contact problems with
     friction as solvable linear complementarity problems. Nonlinear Dynamics, 14(3):231–247, 1997.
     doi:10.1023/A:1008292328909.
[14] A. Tasora and M. Anitescu. A matrix-free cone complementarity approach for solving large-scale,
     nonsmooth, rigid body dynamics. Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering, 200:439–
     453, 2011. doi:10.1016/j.cma.2010.06.030.
[15] M. Borri and S. N. Atluri. Time-finite element method for the constrained dynamics of a rigid body. In
     Computational Mechanics. Springer, Berlin, 1988.
[16] T. J. R. Hughes and G. M. Hulbert. Space-time finite element formulations for elastodynamics: for-
     mulations and error estimates. Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering, 66:339–363,
     1988.
[17] G. M. Hulbert. Time finite element methods for structural dynamics. International Journal for Numerical
     Methods in Engineering, 33:307–331, 1992.
[18] C. S. Jog, M. Agrawal, and A. Nandy. The time finite element as a robust general scheme for solving
     nonlinear dynamic equations including chaotic systems. Applied Mathematics and Computation, 279:43–61,
     2016.
[19] O. A. Bauchau. The finite element method in time for multibody dynamics. Journal of Computational
     and Nonlinear Dynamics, 19(7):071001, 2024. doi:10.1115/1.4063953.
[20] P. Brown and J. McPhee. A continuous velocity-based friction model for dynamics and control with
     physically meaningful parameters. Journal of Computational and Nonlinear Dynamics, 11:054502, 2016.
     doi:10.1115/1.4033658.
[21] J. Taves, A. Kissel, and D. Negrut. On an exponential map approach for rigid body kinematics and
     dynamics analysis. Technical Report TR-2020-08, Simulation-Based Engineering Laboratory, University
     of Wisconsin–Madison, 2020.
[22] A. Kissel, D. Negrut, and J. Taves. Dwelling on the connection between SO(3) and rotation matrices
     in rigid multibody dynamics. Part 1: Description of an index-3 DAE solution approach. In ASME
     IDETC-CIE, 2021. doi:10.1115/DETC2021-72057.
[23] A. Kissel, D. Negrut, and J. Taves. Constrained multibody kinematics and dynamics in absolute coordi-
     nates: a discussion of three approaches to representing rigid body rotation. Journal of Computational
     and Nonlinear Dynamics, 17(10):101008, 2022. doi:10.1115/1.4055140.
[24] L. Fang, A. Kissel, R. Zhang, and D. Negrut. On the use of half-implicit numerical integration in multibody
     dynamics. Journal of Computational and Nonlinear Dynamics, 18(1):014501, 2023. doi:10.1115/1.4056183.
[25] A. Kissel, L. Bakke, and D. Negrut. Reducing the constrained multibody dynamics problem to the
     solution of a system of ordinary differential equations via velocity partitioning and Lie group integration.
     Journal of Computational and Nonlinear Dynamics, 19(7), 2024. doi:10.1115/1.4065254.
[26] J. Wang. Current pipeline contract and v047/v048 claim-boundary artifacts. Local project artifacts in
     lie_group_integrator_work, 2026.



                                                       24
