                     EasyChair Preprint
                             № 13546




A Performance Comparison of Several Lie Group
Integration Methods for Solving the Equations
of Constrained Multibody Dynamics

Alexandra Kissel, Luning Bakke and Dan Negrut




                                 EasyChair preprints are intended for rapid
                                 dissemination of research results and are
                                 integrated with the rest of EasyChair.



                       June 4, 2024
                                                           The 7th International Conference on Multibody System Dynamics
                                                                                       June 9-13, 2024, Madison, WI, USA


     A performance comparison of several Lie group integration methods
         for solving the equations of constrained multibody dynamics
                             Alexandra Kissel, Luning Bakke, Dan Negrut

                                Department of Mechanical Engineering
                                   University of Wisconsin–Madison
                             1513 University Ave, Madison, WI 53706, USA
                                   [akissel, lfang9, negrut]@wisc.edu

Abstract
When expressed in absolute coordinates, the constrained multibody dynamics problem results in a sys-
tem of index-3 differential algebraic equations (DAEs). In [1, 2, 3, 4, 5], we explored three Lie group
integration methods for solving these DAEs: fully-implicit, half-implicit, and velocity coordinate parti-
tioning. It was found that these methods are computationally more efficient in approximating the solution
to the equations of motion than methods which rely on Euler angles or Euler parameters as generalized
coordinates. In this work, we directly compare the accuracy and performance of the three Lie group
approaches to solving the index-3 DAEs. The Python code developed to generate the reported results is
open-source and available in a public repository for reproducibility studies [6].

Methods comparison
Implementation details for the three methods can be found in [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]. In the results reported below,
a tolerance of εtol = 10−5 was used for all numerical experiments. In [4], a similar scaling analysis was
done to compare the fully- and half-implicit integrators. Therein, the tolerances were chosen to ensure
that the methods achieved a similar quality of solution.
Convergence analysis: The fully-implicit, half-implicit, and coordinate partitioning methods employ
first-order Euler explicit and/or implicit integration schemes. We confirmed their first-order accuracy
by conducting an order analysis on the double pendulum in Fig. 1a with physical properties that match
those used in [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]. A reference solution was obtained by integrating a set of ordinary differential
equations (ODEs) using a highly accurate, 8th order Runge-Kutta solver DoPri853 with a step size of
h = 1 × 10−6 s. Relative errors were calculated as ||yi − yref         ref                   ref
                                                             i ||2 /||yi ||2 , where yi and yi are the values
of the solution at time ti produced by the Lie group integrator and the reference solution, respectively.
The relative errors in position were plotted as a function of the step size h on a log-log scale in Fig. 1b.
The half-implicit integrator is shown to be significantly more accurate, very likely due to its symplectic
property (detailed in [4]).
Scaling Analysis: A scaling analysis was performed using a N-body pendulum to compare the computa-
tional performance of the three methods. As shown in Fig. 2a, N rigid links were connected by spherical
joints and subjected to a randomly directed gravitational force ~g. At time t = 0, the links are assigned
an angular velocity of random magnitude ω    ~ i around their longitudinal axis. Tests were conducted for
N = 1, 2, 4, 8, 16, 32. The timing results reported in Fig. 2 indicate that the half-implicit method is the
most time-efficient. This computational advantage is likely due to its Newton iteration matrix, which
is both more accurate and less costly to compute, as discussed in [4]. Conversely, the coordinate parti-
tioning approach demonstrated poor scalability compared to the fully- and half-implicit methods. This
result is mainly linked to the increasing cost of the partitioning step as the number of system degrees of
freedom grows [5].

Discussion. Future work
When comparing the three Lie group methods, the half-implicit solver stands out in both speed and ac-
curacy. While it was only marginally faster than the fully-implicit solver in the scaling analysis, it is
assumed that the higher accuracy reported above translates to the N-body pendulum. Thus, a looser
tolerance and/or larger step size could achieve faster simulation times depending on solution accuracy
requirements. On the other hand, the coordinate partitioning method, while slower than the direct inte-
gration methods, offers advantages in applications which favor ODEs [5]. A similar comparative analysis
will be presented for a seven-body mechanism to provide insights for a complex closed-loop system, but
it has been omitted here due to space limitations.
             (a) Double pendulum schematic.              (b) Order analysis; position coordinate.

                      Figure 1: Integrator order analysis using a double pendulum.




             (a) N-body pendulum schematic.           (b) N-body pendulum scaling results; log-log.

                          Figure 2: Scaling analysis using a N-body pendulum.


References
[1] Taves, J., Kissel, A., and Negrut, D., 2021, “Dwelling on the connection between SO(3) and rotation
    matrices in rigid multibody dynamics. part 1: Description of an index-3 DAE solution approach,” In
    ASME 2021 International Design Engineering Technical Conferences and Computers and Informa-
    tion in Engineering Conference, American Society of Mechanical Engineers.

[2] Taves, J., Kissel, A., and Negrut, D., 2021, “Dwelling on the connection between SO(3) and rotation
    matrices in rigid multibody dynamics. part 2: Comparison against formulations using Euler param-
    eters or Euler angles,” In ASME 2021 International Design Engineering Technical Conferences and
    Computers and Information in Engineering Conference, American Society of Mechanical Engineers.

[3] Kissel, A., Taves, J., and Negrut, D., 2022, “Constrained multibody kinematics and dynamics in
    absolute coordinates: A discussion of three approaches to representing rigid body rotation,” Journal
    of Computational and Nonlinear Dynamics, 17(10), 08, p. 101008 101008.

[4] Fang, L., Kissel, A., Zhang, R., and Negrut, D., 2022, “On the Use of Half-Implicit Numerical
    Integration in Multibody Dynamics,” Journal of Computational and Nonlinear Dynamics, 18(1), 11,
    p. 014501 014501.

[5] Kissel, A., Fang, L., and Negrut, D., 2023, “Using velocity partitioning in the ra formulation to solve
    the equations of constrained multibody dynamics,” In ASME 2023 International Design Engineering
    Technical Conference and Computer and Information in Engineering Conference, Vol. 10, American
    Society of Mechanical Engineers.

[6] Taves, J., Kissel, A., and Negrut, D., 2021,         Software and models for the r −
    A formulation https://github.com/uwsbel/public-metadata/tree/master/2021/ASME/
    rA-formulation Simulation-Based Engineering Laboratory, University of Wisconsin-Madison.
